Samuel is raised
----------------

Samuel bar Jacob was a baker, and rather successful at it too. He lived
in Jerusalem. His fare was delicious. He was pious, he was well known
and well loved. He was also overweight, and he died at the age of 49 of
heart disease, in the month of Tebet in the year 3786, which, before you
think this is a science fiction story, is the month of December in the
year 25 C.E. in the Gregorian calendar.

As is the custom, he was buried the next day. Like his cakes, his
stone-covered tomb was very tastefully done; not opulent or flashy, but
beautiful.

His burial was very well attended, and his wife and children were
lovingly supported by friends and family.

They still missed him dearly when, over Pesach in 3794, nearly eight
years later, there was a terrible earthquake. The stone that covered his
tomb broke.

And Samuel woke.

He felt awful. He felt like death warmed up. He couldn't see a thing.
Years ago his eyes had fallen into his skull, after his brain had
decayed from rampant bacterial growth. His mouth had rotted, and a few
of his teeth were resting in the back of his throat. His entire
digestive tract was a mess, spread across his spine, the remains of his
clothes, and the bottom of his tomb.

He just lay there, overcome with a massive headache.

Days passed. His thoughts seemed to grow clearer. He felt his skin
filling out. Some time during the first day he realised he had started
breathing. On the second day he blinked. It was very bright, even though
he could only see light through a crack in his tomb. He closed his eyes
again, and just enjoyed the feeling of breathing in, and breathing out.
On the third day though, he felt strong enough to get up.

In fact, as he moved his knees up, and pushed against the stone with his
arms, he felt better than he had in at least twenty years, maybe thirty.

He pushed against the broken stone lid of his tomb, and it moved. It
didn't feel as heavy as it had looked.

He stood up.

And his clothes fell off. They were stained, shredded, and really
disgusting. He wrapped them around his waist, to preserve a little of
his dignity, and looked around him.

Some of the other tombs were also broken.

A little way off he spotted Isaac, a cobbler from down the road, whom
he'd got on really well with. They used to drink wine together at the
end of the week. Isaac was looking a little dazed. He was wandering from
tombstone to tombstone, reading the names. Isaac had died ten years
before Samuel. He must have been in his late sixties, maybe even early
seventies; certainly a long life. Samuel called out, "Hey, Isaac!"

Isaac turned to him. "Samuel? Is that you?"

"Isaac! Yes, it's me. What? What are you doing?"

"I have no idea! What am I doing here? I'm dead. What am I doing? Why am
I … why am I alive?"

Samuel replied, "I don't know. I'm also dead. I mean, I was dead. I woke
up. Three days ago. Kind of. I couldn't see. I couldn't breathe. Now I'm
fine. In fact, I'm great!"

"I know," said Isaac. "I know! I haven't felt better! I'm great! Look at
me! Aren't I great?! My knees! My hips! My hands! I haven't had this
much meat on my bones since, I don't know. Maybe ever!"

"Isaac!" said Samuel, "Do you think your wife is still alive?"

"Oh I don't know Sammy. She was getting a little old too, you know."

"Let's go and find out."

"Yes. Let's go. But Samuel, my clothes are a bit, you know, uh, not so
good."

"It's OK, Isaac. Maybe we'll find someone on the way who can give us
some better clothes."

So they started walking.

As they approached the cemetary gate, they heard a dull thump about
a cubit from the exit. Samuel turned to Isaac. "Did you hear that?" Then
they both clearly heard a muffled shout. It was coming from another
tomb, but this one was just cracked, not completely broken as Samuel's
had been.

Samuel and Isaac each took a corner, and lifted it, to reveal a woman.
She looked as if she was about in her 50s. And she was clearly very
relieved to see them. But she didn't want to join them. She had been
dead for twenty years and she wanted to stay in the cemetary for a bit,
to see if she could find any of her old friends.

So the two men went ahead into the city.

Nobody recognised Isaac.

But they recognised Samuel. Some of them must have thought they
recognised him, but they convinced themselves that they didn't. They
would look at him, with that glimmer of recognition, and then just think
they were seeing someone who looking like Samuel, but wasn't really.
Because the real Samuel was dead.

It could also have been his clothes. When Samuel was alive, you know,
the first time, he dressed quite well. He would never have walked around
wearing nothing but old rags wrapped around his waist. Only his wife had
seen his bare torso since his thirties.

Then he saw his daughter's friend Rebecca.

"Samuel?" Rebecca was staring at him.

"Rebecca?"

"Oh my God! Oh my God! Samuel! Oh my God!" Her hands went up to her
face. She looked frightened. She looked like she might scream. Or cry.

Samuel didn't know what to do. "It's OK, it's OK, Rebecca, it's OK."

"Samuel! Why … are you here?" Rebecca managed.

"I don't know." Samuel said, "But it's great! Isn't it?"

"Uh," Rebecca stared at him. Can you hug someone who has been dead? Are
they still unclean if they come back to life? Rebecca didn't know what
to do. But Samuel seemed to be fine. He was happy, and she wanted to be
happy too.

"My family," said Samuel, "Where is my family?"

"Oh! Rachel and Joseph live in your old house!" Rebecca was relieved,
overjoyed even, to be able to help. They would be so happy. They would
be so surprised! Oh my God! This was going to be fine, she thought.

She took his hand, and lead him down the road. Samuel turned to Isaac,
and said, "Come!" and Isaac came. Rebecca was shouting, "Rachel! Rachel!
It's Samuel! He's here! Your dad! He's back!"

Rachel opened the front door before they reached it. "What?!"

And then she just started crying. "Joseph!" she shouted. "Joe! Joe! Joe
come here! Come here now! Mom! Mom!" she cried as she ran to her dad.
"Dad!" she shouted, in his ear, as she wrapped her arms around his neck,
and he squeezed her. He hadn't been able to squeeze her like that for so
long, and it felt so good. "Rachel!" he gasped. She let go a little.
"Daddy! What are you doing here?"

"I don't know." Samuel was crying too now. "But, you remember Isaac." He
nodded to his old, reanimated friend.

Rachel had that confused frown on her face. "Isaac? Yes. What is he—what
are you doing here, mister Abramson?"

Isaac lifted one shoulder and raised his eyebrows. "I don't know. It's a
miracle."

"It's a miracle," Rachel echoed.

"Is your mother … ?" started Samuel.

"Yes!" shouted Rachel. "Mom! Mom!" She grabbed her father's hand, and
dragged him into the house. In the room in the back, sitting on her
bed—oh, they just burst into the room, Rachel shouting, still, "Mom,
mom," and her mother asking, "What?! What Rachel, what are you shouting
for?"—Samuel's widow stared at him. "Samuel?"

"Hi."

That was all he could think of.

She looked, well, older. She was lovely. Lovely as always. But the
intervening few years had, there isn't a tactful way to put this, they
had taken their toll. Sarah was looking sallow, and fragile.

"My love." Samuel let go his daughter's hand, and sat down next to his
wife, to put his arms around her, but she moved sideways, away from him.
"Samuel?"

"It's me, Sarah! It's me. I'm back. I don't how, but I'm back."

"No." Sarah edged further away. "No you're not. This is a trick. This is
wrong. Look at you. How can you look like that? Why aren't you fat?
That's not you. You … aren't my Samuel. My Samuel was fat."

"Sarah?" This was not going the right way.

"Mom," Rachel tried to help. Rebecca was here too now, and Isaac and
Joseph. "Mom, this is Dad. It's a miracle. Look, mister Abramson from
down the road is here too."

"Isaac?" Sarah asked.

"Hello Sarah." Isaac offered.


    Again Jesus cried out in a loud voice. Then he died.

    Then the curtain in the Temple split into two pieces. The tear
    started at the top and tore all the way down to the bottom. Also,
    the earth shook and rocks broke apart. The graves opened, and many
    of God’s people who had died were raised from death. They came out
    of the graves after Jesus was raised from death. They went into the
    holy city, and many people saw them.

    — The Gospel of Matthew 27:50—53


