Samuel and Sarah
----------------

For the next few days Sarah gradually became accustomed to having Samuel
back.

He popped into the bakery. Joseph had taken over the business, and
although he didn't do things the same way as Samuel, the business was
going fine. Even well, Samuel had to admit.

Samuel became an instance celebrity. A lot of people came into the
bakery to see him. A lot of people; there were queues outside every
lunchtime down the street. Samuel started baking a couple of items the
way he used to. He didn't want to run the show any more, or take over
from Joseph at all. And he made that clear to Joseph, to avoid any
complications. Joseph seemed to be a bit relieved about that, but also
understood that Samuel was bringing in a lot of customers, and was happy
to have his "signature" bagel, and his apple and cinnamon cake with
crushed almond glaze. (Joseph had never been able to get it to taste the
same. Samuel had taken his secret to the grave. But now that he was back
from that very same grave, Joseph paid close attention, and noticed what
he had missed before; Samuel added a lot of honey to the water that he
boiled the apples in.)

Samuel's bagel was just called "Samuel's Signature Bagel" and they
charged just over 50% more than the other bagels. But his cake was
special. It was delicious, of course. But now it was a celebration of
Samuel's return. They called it the "Samuel's Risen Again Cake", and
they just couldn't make enough of them.

Joseph was very happy. But not a fraction as happy as Rachel. Rachel
kept on hugging her dad at every opportunity.

And Sarah warmed to having her husband back. Everyone else was so happy,
and it quickly rubbed off on her. She had felt a little bad about her
initial reaction, but Samuel seemed to let it go, and after a day or two
she swung to the opposite sentiment, like she had to restrain herself a
little. For years now she had been the matriarch of the family, and that
came with a certain decorum. She couldn't just behave the way her
daughter did.

She saved that for when they were alone. Samuel hadn't looked this good
since early in their marriage. His chest was so firm. His stomach so
flat. She felt a little grateful that he still wanted her. She felt at
least ten years older, and here he was, looking twenty years younger.
She felt God was spoiling her, and so, in bed, she spoilt Samuel in
return, and hoped that Yahweh discretely kept his eyes closed.


