Samuel and Jesus
----------------

A week or two after Samuel's resurrection, a Hellenised Jewish customer
said to Samuel, "You know a prophet was also resurrected at the same
time as you."

"Really?" asked Samuel. "What kind of prophet?" Hellenised Jews could be
a bit weird sometimes.

"The real kind." The man introduced himself as Matthew, and said, "You
really should meet Him. He is amazing. And what's more, you already have
a miracle in common. If that isn't a sign from God that you must meet, I
don't know what is."

So that Shabbat, instead of going to the Temple with his family as
usual, Samuel met up with Matthew, and they both went to a room above a
shop, where they met more followers of this resurrected prophet.

They all sounded very excited about this prophet. Matthew had
down-played the significance that his followers ascribed to him. They
didn't just think he was a prophet. They considered him to be the
messiah. And, also, the son of God.

Samuel felt extremely uncomfortable about this.

There is only one God, Yahweh. The Torah is very, very clear about that.
And Asherah, the queen of the heavens, is not to be worshipped. She is
not a goddess. She is just an old myth. So how could Yahweh have a son?

Matthew and his friend Cephas explained it. Yahweh's Spirit, the Spirit
with which Yahweh created the world, came down from heaven, and caused a
virgin to fall pregnant, in accordance with the prophet Isaiah. An angel
told her fiancé, Joseph, not to leave her, that she was pregnant with
the son of God, and to name Him Jesus.

"Oh," said Samuel, still a little sceptical. "Is he a Pharisee?"

"Kind of, his father is a carpenter in Nazareth, but he is not like many
Pharisees. Some of his teachings are like those of Rabbi Hillel. He
teaches love, and selflessness. He keeps the mitzvot [#]_, of course,
but He fulfills the Torah."

About 50 people arrived. Some had brought bread, and some others had
brought wine. Everyone at the meeting gathered around a table. They
broke up the bread, poured out the wine, and passed it around. Matthew
explained to Samuel that they do this every time they meet, in memory of
the last time they had supper with Jesus before he was killed.

Suddenly one of the followers shouted, "Jesus!" Everyone turned in the
direction of the shout. One follower had dropped to his knees in front
of a man. The rest of the room realised that the man was busy talking to
a follower. He was saying,

    "You must tell people to change their hearts and lives. If they do
    this, their sins will be forgiven. You must start at Jerusalem and
    preach these things in my name to all nations."

    — The Gospel of Luke 24:47

Nobody interrupted him. He turned, and looked at Matthew, and said,

    “The Son of Man will come again with his Father’s glory and with his
    angels. At that time, he will reward everyone for what he has done.
    I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.”

    — The Gospel of Matthew 16:27—28


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Jewish Law; God's commandments.


