Sarah dies
----------

As the years passed, Sarah grew older. That goes without saying, doesn't
it? Everyone grew older. But every now and then someone would realise
that Samuel was looking really good for his age. Really, really good,
for his age. When Sarah was 72 she caught a cold, and it progressed to
pneumonia, and she died. Samuel was 75, kind of. He still looked, and
felt, like a fit 49. He looked younger than Joseph, who was 59 now, and
almost as big as Samuel had been when he had died, and was walking with
a stick. People who didn't know them would never have believed that
Samuel was Joseph's father-in-law.

After Sarah's kevura, a lot of people were talking. And what they were
saying wasn't nice. Oh, they were tremendously nice about Sarah. And
they loved the family. But they were very not happy about Samuel.

A little remark here. A comment there. Samuel asked Joseph that evening
what he thought. Joseph said, "Samuel, I've been meaning to talk to you,
but with Sarah being sick and all, I thought I'd wait."

"Sure," said Samuel. "What did you want to say?"

"It's not good, Samuel. People have been talking to Rachel, and Rachel's
been telling me. They think this is wrong."

"I can't believe that, Joe. I mean, I rose from the dead. I climbed out
of my grave the same day Jesus walked out of his. That's God. There's
nothing else it can be. It's the most powerful miracle of all miracles.
More powerful than a burning bush. More powerful that the parting of a
sea. People don't just come back from the dead after eight years, Joe.
Only God does that."

"I know, Samuel, I know. It's not me saying these things. It's other
people. Not everyone saw Jesus walking about as you did. Not everyone
saw him rising into heaven. They don't know."

"Exactly, Joe, they don't know."

"Yes, but that's the problem, right there. They don't know and they are
afraid. Look at you. You're older than me. You're older than my dad, and
my dad is dead. But at the same time you're younger than me. That scares
people. That totally freaks them out. They get afraid every time they
see you. And when people are really frightened, and they don't know any
better, they do bad things."

"What do you mean, 'bad things'?"

"I think, if nothing changes, they might hurt you. They're not going to
do anything while we sit shiva, and probably nothing during shloshim.
But maybe think of a place to go. Do you have family outside Jerusalem?"

Samuel was quiet. He had a cousin in Hebron. He didn't want to think
about this right now. He had just lost his wife. Go? Move? Run away?

And what about Isaac Abramson? Is he also in danger? And that woman he
helped out of her tomb those years ago? He didn't even know who she was.
What happened to her?

Isaac came to visit Samuel during shiva, which is the first week of
mourning in the Jewish custom. Samuel asked him, "Isaac, are people
talking about how we, uh, don't get older."

"A little. I think not so much about me, though, because I look older
than you. I do feel young, but my hair is white, while yours is still
salt-and-pepper."

"Isaac, Joseph says people have been talking about me. He says they are
afraid of me, and they might hurt me."

"Is that true?" Isaac asked.

"I think it is. They say little comments. I hear their remarks. They say
them like they are jokes, but their smiles are false. I think Joseph
might be right. He said to me yesterday, 'Samuel, have you thought about
what I said?' I said, 'When I'm not thinking about Sarah, it's all I
think about'. He said, 'I've been thinking about it a lot too. I have
just lost a mother, and I will be losing a father too.' He's a good boy,
Joe is. I'm glad Rachel has him."

"Losing? What does he mean 'losing'?" Isaac was concerned.

"I think I must go, Isaac."

"Where?"

"I don't know. I have a cousin in Hebron. Maybe there."

"Do you think it is that serious?"

"Yes, I think it might be. Joseph is afraid people might start to do
stupid things. Bad things."

"That serious?" Isaac asked again.

"Maybe. I trust Joseph. This is not easy. It is not a good time for me.
I am sitting shiva, you know. I have just lost my wife." Samuel paused.
Isaac held his hand. After a while Samuel continued. "I have just lost
my wife. People are thinking, 'Why did Sarah die first? Why is Samuel so
young? It is wrong.'"

"But you did die."

"I know."

"And it isn't wrong. It's a miracle. Can't they see that?"

"No. They can't. Some people remember. My people remember. My people are
happy for me. My people are waiting for Jesus to return. They are
excited. I make them excited, because I am a reminder. I also rose from
the dead, like Jesus. But not everyone sees it like that. Not everyone
believes. For them, I am â€¦ " he paused again, "I am a freak. A
deviant. An abomination."

"That's crazy."

Samuel was quiet for a few minutes, while he wondered how to ask, and
then he just said it, "Will you come with me?"

"What?"

"Will you come to Hebron, or wherever we decide to go. We don't have to
go to Hebron. Will you come with me? We are the same. You will ahve this
problem too one day. Maybe sooner than you think. You will also have to
leave. Come with me. It will be better if we stick together."

Isaac was a little taken aback. "Gee, Samuel. I never thought. Uh. This
is a big thing you are asking. Let me think about it."

"OK," agreed Samuel.

They did not talk about it for the rest of Samuel's shloshim, the month
after the burial. But Samuel bought a travel bag, and he kept some
clothes and things separate.

The day after the end of his shloshim, literally thirty one days after
Sarah had been buried, someone threw a stone at the bakery. It came from
the crowd. Neither Joseph not Samuel knew who threw it. But they both
knew why.

That evening Samuel went to Isaac's house.

"Isaac, I have to go."

"You just got here." Isaac smiled, but he knew what Samuel meant, and he
was trying to make light of it.

"Isaac, they threw a stone at the bakery today."

"Really?"

"Yes. I need to know. Am I going alone, or will you come with me?"

"I haven't decided. I must still say goodbye to my family."

Samuel was dejected. He had really been hoping that Isaac would join
him. Isaac would make this a journey, and not just a sad and lonely
flight.

"Please, Isaac. With you this will be an adventure. Without you nothing
will distract me from my sadness."

Isaac thought. He couldn't say no. How could he say no?

"OK."

Samuel hugged him. Isaac said, "I will probably have to go anyway.
Better to go now, with you, than later, alone."

Samuel went home to pack his travel bag, and say his goodbyes while
Isaac spoke to his family, and said his goodbyes too. Isaac had been
living with one of his grandchildren, and to be honest they didn't seem
as sad as Samuel's family about his departure. Maybe it was the right
time after all.


