Travel
------

Samuel and Isaac travelled south to Hebron. They stayed with Samuel's
cousin, David, for about three months. David was much younger than
Samuel, but by now looked older. He didn't recognise Samuel, but saw the
likeness after some conversation about the family in Jerusalem.

"To what do we owe the pleasure of your visit?" asked David.

This was a pretty predictable question, and one for which Samuel and
Isaac had prepared. "Well, Isaac and I are old friends, and although we
look healthy, we wanted to travel a bit. We don't want to stay long. We
haven't decided where to go next; perhaps east. But we wanted a little
adventure while we still can."

That seemed to satisfy David.

Samuel baked for the family, for which they were appreciative. Isaac
mended a few shoes. Then Samuel offered his services with a baker in the
neighbourhood, and although the pay was lousy, he gave half to David,
and David said, "Stay as long as you want!"

They stayed for ten years. David's wife, Mariam, asked, "Samuel, what do
you do to look so healthy?"

"I come from good stock!" Samuel joked, grinning at David. But he knew,
then, it was time to move on.

They moved to Perea, east of the Dead Sea, where they settled for twenty
years, and then headed north. Each time they settled it was for no more
than about twenty years. They survived the Jewish–Roman wars, including
the Bar Kokhba revolt, and the mass killing of Jews that followed it.

They witnessed the rise of Christianity. Samuel and Isaac would speak of
Jesus, and of Matthew and Cephas, but only in private. Cephas, or Peter
as he had become known in Rome, had died long ago. In public, they
worshipped with the churches in whichever city they lived, but Samuel
never mentioned that he had met Jesus, had witnessed his ascension into
heaven, had known Peter, and that it was Matthew, his customer at the
bakery, who had brought him to his first communion, all that time ago;
what, for everyone else, was lifetimes ago.

He did not live in any place long enough to live a lifetime with anyone.
Anyone but Isaac, but that wasn't the same. He missed it. Sarah was the
last person he loved for a lifetime. And death became an interest for
Samuel.

They moved north of Israel, through Phoenicia, all the way up to
Constantinople. There he befriended a couple of old people, John and
Marcia. For decades everything had felt transitory. He and Isaac would
settle down. Isaac would work for a cobbler. Samuel would work for a
baker. They would make friends at church. But they never told anyone
anything that would surprise or frighten them. And they always knew that
one day they would say their goodbyes, and leave.

He had trusted people before. He had married a widow in Antioch named
Julia. One night, after she had accused him of lying to her, or, at
least, hiding the truth from her, he had told her everything. Absolutely
everything. She had cried. He didn't understand why. Maybe she thought
that he was still hiding the truth, but instead of saying nothing, now
he was covering it up with a really big lie. Maybe she thought he was
crazy. Maybe she believed him, and realised that she could never be a
part of his life the way she had wanted to be. Maybe she was just sad,
and confused, and even lonelier than she had been before.

She had cried herself to sleep. And the next morning she had quietly
asked Samuel to leave. And Samuel had quietly left. At first he didn't
leave the city, he just moved out of the house, but then someone asked
him if it was true, that he really had met Jesus. Samuel denied it. The
same day he went to Isaac and told him it was time they moved on.

Samuel wanted to feel a kind of permanence that ends naturally. He
thought that would be more genuine. When he met John and Marcia in
Constantinople they were already frail. He and Isaac stayed with them,
and cooked and cleaned for them in exchange for accommodation. They were
Greek, and Samuel and Isaac introduced them to traditional Jewish
cooking, and observed Jewish holidays and festivals with them. They
really enjoyed that. And living in a big city, and running the kitchen
themselves, allowed Samuel and Isaac to keep a kosher kitchen. They
found that deeply gratifying, and peaceful. John and Marcia were
Christians, but very Hellenistic in their religion. But the rigour of
Jewish ritual gave them a sense of order, even purpose perhaps, that
seemed to rejuvenate them.

"Why do you keep the mitzvot, if you are Christian?" asked Marcia, after
she had lit the Shabbat candles one Friday evening.

Samuel replied, “Jesus said,

    ‘Don’t think that I have come to destroy the law of Moses or the
    teaching of the prophets. I have not come to destroy their teachings
    but to do what they said. I tell you the truth. Nothing will
    disappear from the law until heaven and earth are gone. The law will
    not lose even the smallest letter or the smallest part of a letter
    until all has happened.’”

    — The Gospel of Matthew 5:17—18

"Then shouldn't all Christians keep the mitzvot?" asked John.

"They should keep the mitzvot if they want to. Keeping the mitzvot
brings me peace. But it is not the mitzvot that saves us; it is faith
in Jesus."

That seemed like a satisfying answer. John pondered it, and then asked,
"What do you mean?"

"About what?"

"Faith in Jesus. Do you mean trust that Jesus will save us?"

"Yes," said Samuel, "I have faith that Jesus will save us. Literally. He
will return at the end of the world. Before I am dead, he will come with
his kingdom. He said so. And I trust him."

Samuel got a sinking feeling in his stomach. He had said too much. He
wondered whether John or Marcia would pick it up. He smiled his I-trust-
him smile, and hoped it would cover up his before-I-am-dead slip.

"What?" said John. "Before you are dead?"

Crap. The smile hadn't worked. Samuel looked at Isaac. Isaac looked
back, his eyes wide, with a look of resignation on his face. He gave a
tiny shrug.

"Jesus said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'"

    — The Gospel of Matthew 16:28

Samuel went one, "I was standing there."

"You saw Jesus?!"

"Yes."

John stared at Samuel.

Marcia asked Isaac, "Did you see Jesus?"

"No. Matthew was a customer of Samuel. Samuel had a bakery. In
Jerusalem. Matthew took Samuel to a communion supper. Jesus appeared. It
was the last time that Jesus appeared before he ascended into heaven. I
wasn't there."

"Of course you weren't there. How old are you, Isaac?"

"I don't know. But I believe Samuel. We have known each other for a very
long time?"

"How long?"

"A very, very long time. We … we remember the Temple."

"Which temple?"

"The Temple. The Temple in Jerusalem. It was destroyed in the Great
Jewish Revolt." Isaac was trying to remember exactly when, but it was a
long time ago. It had been a bad time.

John and Marcia were watching them, trying to decide whether they were
crazy, or lying, or telling the truth.

Then, with a little laugh, John said, "Well, guys, you certainly seem to
know what you're talking about, then. If you trust Jesus, then we trust
Jesus, because we trust you."

And that was that.

Samuel's and Isaac's longevity was never spoken about again.

"Did they believe us?" Samuel asked Isaac a couple of days later.

"I don't know," said Isaac. "Let's not ask them."

"Agreed."

But the fact that Samuel and Isaac had actually told them and they
hadn't had to move because of it, make Samuel feel a sense of closeness
and commitment to John and Marcia that he had not felt since Jerusalem.
John and Marcia felt, to him, like family.

When Marcia became ill, Samuel helped alongside her slave, for tasks
that did not require the kind of discretion that would prevent the
assistance of a man.

John and Marica had never had children, and Marcia meant everything to
John. Despite his friendship with Samuel and Isaac, after Marvia's death
John pined to be with her gain. He died one cold winter night two years
later.

Samuel felt exactly the way he had wanted to feel; physical
grief. The kind of grief he had felt when Sarah had died. It felt like
an illness, when you are weak. And numb. He and Isaac grieved together.

"When is he coming back, do you think, Isaac?"

Isaac knew Samuel meant Jesus.

"I don't know."

"Will it be long, do you think?"

"I thought it would be soon. But it hasn't been soon."

"Do you think we will die?" wondered Samuel.

"Probably not."

"Then let's go south."

John had left Samuel and Isaac his entire estate. They gave it all to
the church of Constantinople, and headed south, towards Arabia, and the
Muslims.


