Spain
-----

When the south of Spain was conquered by Castile, Christians and Jews
were welcomed into the kingdom, on condition they followed the
traditions of the church of Rome. About 1500 years had passed since
Samuel had met Jesus, and this was the first time he and Isaac had
encountered the church of Rome. It wasn't fundamentally different from
Christianity under the caliphate, except for the fact that being
Christian meant being not Jewish; not Jewish at all.

Samuel and Isaac hadn't experienced anything like this since the Roman-
Jewish Wars, over a 1000 years earlier. Islam had respected their
practices, and although there was always a limit to their professional
progress, they were subject to a similar limit as a result their
immortality; they would always need to move and take on new identities,
eventually, and that made it difficult to accummulate wealth. Also,
wealth attracted attention, and attention was exactly what they needed
to avoid.

They kept their heads down. They lived together in a moderate house.
They worshipped in the Seville Cathedral. They had Christian friends.
They ate meals with them, and one of their friends, Juan Marco was
Samuel's boss in a bakery in Seville. So when Jews were forced to
convert, or be killed, nobody accused or even suspected Samuel and Isaac
of being Jewish.

But they moved to Cordoba, and one night in 1482 the Inquisition raided
their house before dawn, and found prayer shawls. They seized Samuel and
Isaac, and interrogated them. Samuel and Isaac both insisted they were
Christian. It was clear to the inquisitors that they had a deep
understanding of Christianity. But when their Cordoban friends were
asked about them, they said they hadn't known them for long.

It was also very suspicious that two men of their age lived alone
together. They were accused of sodomy, and tortured for a confession.
Their fingernails were ripped out. At one point Isaac said he may have
had a whistful feeling towards Samuel, but that was many years ago, on a
particularly lonely and drunken evening, and nothing had ever happened.
But it was enough, and instead of pursuading his torturers that he was
not gay, Isaac was found guilty of sodomy.

At one point, while Samuel's feet were being burned, he exclaimed that
he was more of a Christian than they could ever be. On further enquiry,
Samuel confessed to meeting Jesus, and Peter, and having known Matthew.
Well, that did it. Samuel was found guilty of Satanic possession.

They were imprisonned for a month. Then they were paraded through the
city clothed in yellow sackcloth with their heads covered, and then led
outside to the quemadero, the burning place. They were chained to a
wooden pole, back-to-back, on top of a tarred pyre, and then the pyre
was set alight. Their feet burned. Their lungs filled with black smoke.
And each could feel the other writhing in pain as the chains would
tighten and loosen. Eventually they lost consciousness, and then fell
into a coma.

They were left outside for a day and then they were thrown into a pit.

They remained unconscious for a week. During that time their fingers and
toes grew back. And their ears, and their eyelids. Their lungs healed.
They successfully fought off massive infection as skin once again
covered their flesh. It took Samuel three days to force himself, pushing
and scratching, up to the surface, where he could finally breathe
properly. Then he dug back down all night, shouting to Isaac, who
shouted back, until he had dug his friend out too. They were naked. They
had no hair on their heads, no eyebrows or eyelashes, and a few days'
worth of stubble on their jaws. Their new fingernails were shredded from
the digging and their fingers were bleeding again. They made their way
to the Guadalquivir River, and lay in it, allowing themselves to drift
out of the city.

When they climbed out, they begged for clothes, and food, and headed
northeast. Northeast out of Spain, through France, to the Holy Roman
Empire.


