Berlin
------

They spent about twenty years in Berlin, then the capital of the
principality of Brandenburg. They found a community of Sephardic [#]_
Jews. And they found a Christian attitude that was a lot less
sympathetic to Rome than the name "Holy Roman Empire" would suggest.
Unlike with southern and western European kingdoms, since Charlemagne,
or Karl der Große as he was known locally, the papacy and the central
European ruling class seemed to have established a working relationship
with more clearly-defined boundaries; popes look after souls, and kings
look after governance.

It was here that Samuel first heard of the legend of Der Ewige Jude, the
Eternal Jew. Once again, Samuel was working as a baker. A farmer was
delivering flour one day, and mentioned a remarkable thing that had
happened. He said that his plough had moved on Sunday. It had fallen
over, and the ground near it flattened slightly, to form a resting
place. Obviously, said the farmer, it was the Eternal Jew.

Samuel did not want to ask the farmer directly, and so he asked a friend
of his, Werner, over beer that evening. He told Werner what the farmer
told him, and Werner confirmed the story, and explained, "Yes, his name
is Cartaphilus. He is a shoemaker. He struck Jesus when Jesus rested
while carrying his cross, and told him to go faster. Jesus replied to
him, 'I shall rest now, but you shall not rest until the last day.'"

Samuel said, "No. That's not it."

"What do you mean?" asked Werner, "What's not it?"

"He did not strike Jesus. He is waiting for Jesus. Jesus said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'

"He is waiting for Jesus. He has lived longer than Methuselah. He has
seen more than any man should ever see. He loves Jesus, and he yearns
for Jesus' return. He yearns for it like a man lost in the desert yearns
for water."

Werner looked at him for a moment. "How do you know that?"

"Because the Bible says so. It is in the Gospel of Matthew. He is a
follower of Jesus. He would never have struck him."

"Oh." Werner thought for a moment. "Then who moved the farmer's plough?"

"I don't know. Maybe it just fell, and a dog lay in its shade. It could
have been anything."

That night Samuel could not sleep. He kept going over the story in his
mind.

Why did Jesus say that?

Why, when lots of people were brought back from the dead that Passover
centuries ago, why did only Jesus get lifted up into heaven?

Was Samuel being punished? How could that be? Samuel was a better
Christian than any Christian he knew. He kept the mitzvot. In the early
days, especially in Jerusalem, all Christians kept the mitzvot. Now none
of them do. He trusted Jesus. He followed Jesus longer than anyone.
Isaac came a close second, but Isaac had come to Christianity after
Samuel. Even Job, when God was testing him, even Job, one day, got to
die. Samuel did not get to die. Samuel had been burned until he was like
a sacrificial offering.

    The priest must burn all the animal’s parts on the altar. It is a
    whole burnt offering, an offering made by fire. And its smell is
    pleasing to the Lord.

    — Leviticus 1:9

Was the smell of Samuel's burnt offering displeasing to the Lord? He had
not struck Jesus. He didn't even get to speak to Jesus. Why was he
chosen? Why not Matthew? Or Cephas?

Maybe it was because he had not spent his life preaching to all nations,
as Jesus had instructed. He had preached a little. You know, a
conversation here, and an encouragement there. But he had always lived a
quiet life, not like Cephas, not like Paul. He was friendly, even jovial,
but inside he had always been timid. Was that why God was punishing him?

Is Jesus waiting for him before he returns? Is the fact that Jesus has
not yet returned somehow because of him? That can't be.

He must speak to someone about this. He must speak to a priest. He will
go to confession. But not in Berlin. He will be recognised. He will go
to Hamburg.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Jews from Al-Andalus


