Hamburg
-------

"Bless me Father, for I have sinned. It has been a week since my last
confession," Samuel began.

And then he paused.

"Please continue, my son," prompted the priest.

"Well, Father, I am not sure exactly what my sin is, but I know that I
am being punished by God. Maybe tested. I don't know."

"Why do believe this?"

"I have seen Jesus."

Samuel paused. He had thought about this conversation all the way from
Berlin, but he still was unsure how to start, or how to proceed.

"Indeed. We see Jesus, and the effects of the Holy Spirit in creation,
in our lives, and in the lives of others."

"Uh, I mean, about fifteen hundred years ago, I saw Jesus. We were
upstairs, in a room above a shop. Matthew had brought me there. Jesus
appeared. We were all in a state of awe. Jesus was talking to Luke. And
then he turned to Matthew and said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'

"And I know that he was talking about me. I knew at that moment, because
I already knew I was special. And I have known all this time. I knew
when my wife died, and I had not grown older. I knew when the Great
Jewish Revolt was suppressed, and I was spared. I knew when I was
mistaken for a marrano [#]_ in Spain, and burned at the stake, but did
not die."

"Are you telling me the truth, my son?"

"Yes, Father, all of this is true."

"Are you a cobbler?"

"No, Father, but my friend is a cobbler, and he cannot die either."

"Did you live in Armenia?"

"I have lived in Armenia. I have lived in many different places."

"I have heard of you! You are the Eternal Jew."

"No, Father, I mean yes, but the story you heard is not me. I heard that
story too. I heard of the Jew who struck Jesus on his way to be
crucified. I did not do that. I only met Jesus after he rose from the
dead. We both rose from the dead the Sunday after Passover. I am one of
the people spoken of by Matthew in chapter 27 of his gospel."

"This is amazing! My son, I know this is unconventional, but do you mind
if we leave the confessional, and take a walk through the grounds. I
want to see who you are."

"Uh, uh," Samuel was a little afraid. Things had not worked out well
when he had been honest with people to this degree. He liked the
security and sworn secrecy of the confessional.

"We will be alone, and I will not speak of this. I just want to meet
you."

"Uh, OK," agreed Samuel, hesitantly.

They stepped out of the confessional, and the priest looked at him
intensely. "Your eyes are old. I can see that. They look young, but
behind your eyes, I can see you are old.

"I have so many questions," the priest continued.

"I'm not sure I have answers for you," admitted Samuel, "I came to you
because I have questions too."

"Well then, my son, let us start with your questions."

"What does my life mean? Why did Jesus say that, and then just leave me
to live, instead of returning within a normal lifetime."

"I cannot answer that. They ways of the Lord are higher than our minds."

"My life is not unpleasant. The Eternal Jew of the legend is unable to
rest. That is not the case with me. I have a comfortable life; as
comfortable as any other. And, of course, I am not a Jew. I met the
Christ, and I have followed him ever since. I am a Christian. Jesus kept
the Jewish law. I keep the Jewish law. But one thing that is almost
unbearable for me is that God will not allow me to die.

"Many people are afraid of death. But for me, death would mean â€¦ I don't
know what it would mean. Jesus will return before I die. I will never
die. At least, not again. I died eight years before Jesus was killed.
And I rose from my tomb on the same day he did."

"Is that a question?" asked the priest.

"Uh, no."

"May I ask a question?"

"Of course. I will do my best to answer it."

"What is Jesus like?"

"Well, have you read the Old Testament?"

"Of course I have."

"Jesus is like reading the Old Testament, forgiving everything that is
evil or wrong, and living everything that is good. Jesus is the most
compassionate interpretation of the entire Torah. Meeting Jesus is like
seeing God speaking, but in the voice of your dad."

"Really?"

"Yes."

"What did Jesus say to you?"

"He blessed us. And then he ascended into heaven."

"Yes, but what did he say to you, personally."

"He never said anything to me, individually. He spoke to some of the
apostles individually, but to the rest of us he just addressed us
collectively."

"So you didn't really meet him, you just saw him close up."

"Well, sure, I guess you could put it like that."

"So how do you know that Jesus is like the Word of God in the voice of
your dad?"

"Well, I saw him, right? So I should know. Also, the Bible says so, the
Word of God. Right?"

"Yes, look, don't get me wrong. I believe you. I absolutely believe you.
I just want to understand how come. I am a priest. Every time I say
something, people take my word for it. In this city, I am God's
representative, and they believe it because I say it. And I know my
Bible. The Bible is also God's representative, and they believe it
because it says it. But that's why I want to know more. Excuse the pushy
questions. I am hungry for more. You lie in bed at night and think about
what your life means. I also lie in bed at night, and think about what
the Bible means, and what the things I say mean. Why? Why are they true?
Are they true just because it is written? Who wrote it? If I changed the
Bible, and told everyone my version was the real one, they would believe
me. They would, you know. I know they would. Has that ever happened
before?"

"No."

"No?"

"No. You cannot think these thoughts."

"Look, please, the things you have spoken to me about, I cannot tell a
soul, on pain of death. It is an oath I have sworn, as a priest. I am
asking you to offer me the same assurance. The things I have said to
you, they are not acceptable thoughts. We both know that."

"I survived the Inquisition. I know how some thoughts are unacceptable.
Actually, I feel safer that we can keep each other's questions to
ourselves. This has turned out to be more than my confession. This is a
communion of confessions."

"I like that," said the priest, "a communion of confessions. I don't
know whether we have answered any questions, but I am deeply grateful
that I was able to ask."

"I am too, Father. You have given me a lot to think about."

"And you me."


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] A Jew forced to convert to Christianity in Spain


