England
-------

Samuel had to wait a very long time before he could ask the questions
that arose from his conversation with the priest in Hamburg.

He was sitting in a pub on Fleet Street, in London, in 1992. He struck
up a conversation with an author. As it happened, Samuel had recently
read one of his novels, a story involving a time-traveling detective.
Samuel had enjoyed it more than he usually enjoyed books, especially
since Samuel had once actually heard Johann Sebastian Bach perform.

"As it happens, Mr Adams, I know Bach in a way that most people don't,
and I have a particular fondness for his work."

Douglas Adams grinned, "It's Douglas, Samuel. I'm glad you enjoyed my
book."

"Thank you, Douglas. Actually, there is something that has been on my
mind for a while now, and I think it needs a holistic approach to find a
solution. An approach that might play to your strengths."

"Well," started Douglas, a little boubtfully.

"Barman, another two pints, please," interrupted Samuel.

"Well, I don't mind if I do. Thank you Samuel. I will do my best to
answer your question."

Samuel began, "I know Jesus."

"Wait! I'm going to have to stop you right there, Samuel. This is not a
conversation I want to have."

"No, Douglas, I promise this is not the conversation you think it is.
Please give me 60 more seconds."

"OK, but only because you just ordered me another beer."

"OK. Let's deal in the hypothetical then. Imagine a client employs Dirk
Gently [#]_ on a case. The client has met Jesus, in person. And
because of something Jesus said, that client cannot die. The client will
remain alive until Jesus comes with his kingdom."

"OK. You've managed to save yourself there, Samuel, you can keep going."

"My question for Mr Gently is, what is the meaning of his client's
life?"

"The universe, and everything? I thought I stated that answer pretty
clearly [#]_."

Samuel laughed. "No, not the universe and everything. Not yet. Let's
just start with the life of the client."

"OK. Well, Samuel, Averroes, a Muslim philosopher who was also an
Aristotlean—"

"I remember the work of Averroes."

"Ah, good. Then you may recall Averroes believed that there were two
paths to truth; reason and revelation, and that one can use either of
those paths and they both lead to the same truth."

"Yes."

"And later Aquinas proposed that moral truth can only be known through
revelation, because attempts to reason it will only result in flawed
approximations of God's objective morality. But Aquinas also worked hard
to show that one can reason one's way to truth, even the truth of God's
existence."

"Yes. He didn't manage, though, but he did give it the old college try,"
concurred Samuel in the vernacular.

"Yes he did, didn't he? Well, where are we now? Dirk's client's question
is one about experience. And experience includes revelation. And it's
also one about reason. His client can rationalise the meaning of his
extraordinary life, but the reason he does not know it already is
because he has been relying on revelation to reveal it for him. He has
been waiting. Waiting a very, very long time. An unreasonably long
time.

"I think we need to come to terms with the fact that experience is what
happens in our heads. How it gets there is in part a result of what
happens to us, and in part how we understand what happens to us.

"Did Jesus say,

    "I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom."

because he intended to keep them alive for 2000 years, at least, or
because he knew they would live for 2000 years, at least?

"Maybe God is not punishing you, Samuel. Maybe shit just happens, and
something fucking weird happened that Passover weekend, and your body
heals itself faster than you can die. Here's a question for you: If you
destroy your brain—squish it flat; blow it off completely—and your
body grows a new brain, will you still be you? Or will you be someone
else?

"If you are still you, I'd love to know where your body keeps a backup
of all your memories, if not in your head.

"I digress, though. And this next part is important:

"The reason we have aeroplanes and CD players and Apple Macs today, and
we didn't when you were born, is because Averroes was wrong. Reason is
not as good as revelation. And Aquinas was wrong too. Reason is much,
much better than revelation. Revelation is certainly a thing. But
everyone has different revelations. Conservation of energy works the
same for everyone. Gravity works the same for everyone. But the kingdom
of God is slightly different for everyone. And the parts of the kingdon
of God that seem to be the same for everyone don't reveal what is true
about the kingdom of God; they reveal what is true about people.

"Revelation does not tell you about an external reality. Revelation only
ever tells you about yourself. You think you are looking at something
else, but actually, you have always been looking at a mirror."

Samuel stopped him. "But Douglas, I know what I saw. Jesus was a real
guy, and he really did ascend into heaven."

"Heaven? You think heaven is in the sky?"

"Well, I did at the time. I don't anymore."

"Do you think the fact that you thought heaven is in the sky affected
your seeing him rise up into the sky?"

"Maybe," thought Samuel. "I mean, when you put it like that, where would
he be now? In the vaccuum of space? Did he float up until he could just
enter into the heaven dimension, or the spirit realm? Why didn't he do
that on the ground? Maybe the rising into the sky was for show. I mean
when he arrived in the room that day, he just seemed to be there, as if
he had been there all the time but nobody had noticed him."

Douglas continued, "Let's not get caught up in specifics yet. I'll leave
you to ponder that later. I want to wrap up how we know what we know. We
know what is true not through revelation, but through evidence. Science
is a method, and that method has four simple steps: Observe something;
Come up with an idea to explain your observation; Find evidence to
support or disprove your idea; Share your findings. That's it. That's
all there is to it. People talk about science like it's an esoteric
religion. It's not. It's just stuff we've learned by applying that
method. And if you disagree with the findings, you can check the
evidence. People do all the time. People become famous by disproving old
ideas.

"So where does all this leave us? The only truth that revelation reveals
is truth about yourself. Evidence is what determines what is really
true. God is not blessing you, rewarding you or punishing you. You are
who you are. You get to choose how you want to work with that.

"I can't make that choice for you. But I'd like to make some
suggestions. Immortality offers you the opportunity to get really,
really good at stuff. You say you bake really well. That's great. Maybe
you should try to be a teacher next. That is an invaluable skill. And
you have a lot you can teach."


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Douglas Adams wrote two novels about a detective named Dirk
       Gently, "Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency" (1987) and "The
       Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul" (1988)

.. [#] In his novel "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" (1979),
       Douglas Adams features a computer that calculates that the answer
       to "life, the universe and everything" is 42.
