Jesus
-----

Samuel thought about what Douglas had said. He thought about the
questions that the German priest had asked about Jesus. Today, this is
how Samuel explains it to his students.

    Jesus is not just a way of reading Scripture. He is also a
    reflection of ourselves.

*Was there a real man named Jesus?* If you know Samuel very well, and he
trusts you deeply, he will tell you that he thinks that much was real.

*Did he rise up into the sky?* Samuel gets a little uncertain at this
point. Something happened. What it was isn't exactly clear.

*How come is Samuel so old?* He doesn't know. But he is the subject of a
study at his university, and he is going for tests, and maybe someone
will come up with a plausible hypothesis. And maybe whatever we learn
can be used to help people, cure disease and alleviate suffering.

*Where is Isaac?* He is currently living a quiet life in an undisclosed
village somewhere in the English midlands.

*What happened to the woman who Samuel and Isaac helped out of her tomb
all that time ago?* Samuel has thought about her more times than he will
probably admit. He doesn't know. When the results of his study are
published, perhaps she will look him up.

*Oh, come on! The guy was dead for about eight years! His brain had
completely decayed! It was quite obviously a miracle. A 100%
supernatural goddamn miracle. Admit it.* OK. OK. Let's be completely
open and honest about all this, then. I wasn't going to admit it, but
you've got me in a corner here. This is a story that combines a few
slightly impossible things, and then extrapolates a plot. It mixes in
some people who really did exist, like Douglas Adams, with some people
who didn't, like Samuel. I did that because I want to show you
something; I'm using characters and narrative to carry a message. I'm
kind of spoiling the fun a little, but I'm trying to show how Samuel
learns how we know things, and what that means for his life. Maybe it
means something for your life too.

Can you think of another book that uses the same narative devices? What
if some of the things you thought were literal, aren't? Would the
messages be different?
