Appendix
--------

Miracle
^^^^^^^

*Was there a real man named Jesus?* If you know Samuel very well, and he
trusts you deeply, he will tell you that he thinks that much was real.

*Did he rise up into the sky?* Samuel gets a little uncertain at this
point. Something happened. What it was isn't exactly clear.

*How come Samuel is so old?* He doesn't know. But he is the subject of a
study at his university, and he is going for tests, and maybe someone
will come up with a plausible hypothesis. And maybe whatever we learn
can be used to help people, cure disease and alleviate suffering.

*Where is Isaac?* He is currently living a quiet life in an undisclosed
village somewhere in the English midlands.

*What happened to the woman who Samuel and Isaac helped out of her tomb
all that time ago?* Samuel has thought about her more times than he will
probably admit. He doesn't know. When the results of his study are
published, perhaps she will look him up.

*Oh, come on! The guy was dead for about eight years! His brain had
completely decayed! It was quite obviously a miracle. A 100%
supernatural God-proving miracle. Admit it.* OK. OK. Let's be completely
open and honest about all this, then. I wasn't going to explain it, but
you've got me in a corner here. This is a story that combines a few
slightly impossible things, and then extrapolates a plot. It mixes in
some people who really did exist, like Douglas Adams, with some people
who didn't, like Samuel. I did that because I want to show you
something; I'm using characters and narrative to carry a message, and
featuring a few real people, places and events adds credibility and
makes it easier to remember. I'm kind of spoiling the fun a little, but
I'm trying to show how Samuel learns how we know things, and what that
means for his life. Maybe it means something for your life too.

Can you think of another book that uses the same narrative devices? What
if some of the things you thought were literal, aren't? Would the
messages in that other book be any different?


Seriously? More Questions?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*You took Matthew 16 out of chronological order.* Did I? Gosh, look at
that. [#]_

*What translation did you use?* The International Children's Bible.


Dramatis Personae
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Samuel bar Jacob
    The protagonist of our story. A baker from Jerusalem.

Isaac Abramson
    An old friend of Samuel

Rebecca
    Friend of Rachel

Rachel
    Daughter of Samuel

Joseph
    Husband of Rachel

Sarah
    Wife of Samuel

Jesus
    The Son of Man. The Word of God.

Matthew
    A follower of Jesus, later to write the Gospel of Matthew, where
    Samuel is obliquely referenced in chapter 16.

Cephas
    A follower of Jesus, later to establish the churches of Antioch and
    Rome. "Cephas" means "stone" in Aramaic. "Peter" means "stone" in
    Greek. He will later be known as Saint Peter.

David
    Cousin of Samuel

Mariam
    Wife of David

John and Marcia
    Friends of Samuel and Isaac

Julia
    Second wife of Samuel

Juan Marco
    A baker

Douglas Adams
    Douglas Adams


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] You know the Gospel of John does the same with the story of Jesus
       driving the money changers out of the Temple. John has it
       happening at the start of his ministry. Mark, Matthew and Luke
       have it happening at the end. Some scholars say that Jesus must
       have done it twice, but that seems like a bit of a stretch. Why
       would Mark, Matthew and Luke all forget to mention the first
       time, and John not bother to mention the second time? So if it's
       OK for the author of the Gospel of John to play with chronology,
       it should be OK for my little story.
