The Story of The Wandering Jew
==============================

by Norman Hooper


.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/60/Wandering_jew.jpg
   :alt: The Wandering Jew by Gustave Doré

   The Wandering Jew by Gustave Doré


© Norman Hooper, 2015. Some rights reserved. This work is licensed under a
`Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License`_.


.. _Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/



Samuel is raised
----------------

Samuel bar Jacob was a baker, and rather successful at it too. He lived
in Jerusalem. His fare was delicious. He was pious, he was well known
and well loved. He was also overweight, and he died at the age of 49 of
heart disease, in the month of Tebet in the year 3786, which, before you
think this is a science fiction story, is the month of December in the
year 25 C.E. in the Gregorian calendar.

As is the custom, he was buried the next day. Like his cakes, his
stone-covered tomb was very tastefully done; not opulent or flashy, but
beautiful.

His burial was very well attended, and his wife and children were
lovingly supported by friends and family.

They still missed him dearly when, over Pesach in 3794, nearly eight
years later, there was a terrible earthquake. The stone that covered his
tomb broke.

And Samuel woke.

He felt awful. He felt like death warmed up. He couldn't see a thing.
Years ago his eyes had fallen into his skull, after his brain had
decayed from rampant bacterial growth. His mouth had rotted, and a few
of his teeth were resting in the back of his throat. His entire
digestive tract was a mess, spread across his spine, the remains of his
clothes, and the bottom of his tomb.

He just lay there, overcome with a massive headache.

Days passed. His thoughts seemed to grow clearer. He felt his skin
filling out. Some time during the first day he realised he had started
breathing. On the second day he blinked. It was very bright, even though
he could only see light through a crack in his tomb. He closed his eyes
again, and just enjoyed the feeling of breathing in, and breathing out.
On the third day though, he felt strong enough to get up.

In fact, as he moved his knees up, and pushed against the stone with his
arms, he felt better than he had in at least twenty years, maybe thirty.

He pushed against the broken stone lid of his tomb, and it moved. It
didn't feel as heavy as it had looked.

He stood up.

And his clothes fell off. They were stained, shredded, and really
disgusting. He wrapped them around his waist, to preserve a little of
his dignity, and looked around him.

Some of the other tombs were also broken.

A little way off he spotted Isaac, a cobbler from down the road, whom
he'd got on really well with. They used to drink wine together at the
end of the week. Isaac was looking a little dazed. He was wandering from
tombstone to tombstone, reading the names. Isaac had died ten years
before Samuel. He must have been in his late sixties, maybe even early
seventies; certainly a long life. Samuel called out, "Hey, Isaac!"

Isaac turned to him. "Samuel? Is that you?"

"Isaac! Yes, it's me. What? What are you doing?"

"I have no idea! What am I doing here? I'm dead. What am I doing? Why am
I … why am I alive?"

Samuel replied, "I don't know. I'm also dead. I mean, I was dead. I woke
up. Three days ago. Kind of. I couldn't see. I couldn't breathe. Now I'm
fine. In fact, I'm great!"

"I know," said Isaac. "I know! I haven't felt better! I'm great! Look at
me! Aren't I great?! My knees! My hips! My hands! I haven't had this
much meat on my bones since, I don't know. Maybe ever!"

"Isaac!" said Samuel, "Do you think your wife is still alive?"

"Oh I don't know Sammy. She was getting a little old too, you know."

"Let's go and find out."

"Yes. Let's go. But Samuel, my clothes are a bit, you know, uh, not so
good."

"It's OK, Isaac. Maybe we'll find someone on the way who can give us
some better clothes."

So they started walking.

As they approached the cemetary gate, they heard a dull thump about
a cubit from the exit. Samuel turned to Isaac. "Did you hear that?" Then
they both clearly heard a muffled shout. It was coming from another
tomb, but this one was just cracked, not completely broken as Samuel's
had been.

Samuel and Isaac each took a corner, and lifted it, to reveal a woman.
She looked as if she was about in her 50s. And she was clearly very
relieved to see them. But she didn't want to join them. She had been
dead for twenty years and she wanted to stay in the cemetary for a bit,
to see if she could find any of her old friends.

So the two men went ahead into the city.

Nobody recognised Isaac.

But they recognised Samuel. Some of them must have thought they
recognised him, but they convinced themselves that they didn't. They
would look at him, with that glimmer of recognition, and then just think
they were seeing someone who looking like Samuel, but wasn't really.
Because the real Samuel was dead.

It could also have been his clothes. When Samuel was alive, you know,
the first time, he dressed quite well. He would never have walked around
wearing nothing but old rags wrapped around his waist. Only his wife had
seen his bare torso since his thirties.

Then he saw his daughter's friend Rebecca.

"Samuel?" Rebecca was staring at him.

"Rebecca?"

"Oh my God! Oh my God! Samuel! Oh my God!" Her hands went up to her
face. She looked frightened. She looked like she might scream. Or cry.

Samuel didn't know what to do. "It's OK, it's OK, Rebecca, it's OK."

"Samuel! Why … are you here?" Rebecca managed.

"I don't know." Samuel said, "But it's great! Isn't it?"

"Uh," Rebecca stared at him. Can you hug someone who has been dead? Are
they still unclean if they come back to life? Rebecca didn't know what
to do. But Samuel seemed to be fine. He was happy, and she wanted to be
happy too.

"My family," said Samuel, "Where is my family?"

"Oh! Rachel and Joseph live in your old house!" Rebecca was relieved,
overjoyed even, to be able to help. They would be so happy. They would
be so surprised! Oh my God! This was going to be fine, she thought.

She took his hand, and lead him down the road. Samuel turned to Isaac,
and said, "Come!" and Isaac came. Rebecca was shouting, "Rachel! Rachel!
It's Samuel! He's here! Your dad! He's back!"

Rachel opened the front door before they reached it. "What?!"

And then she just started crying. "Joseph!" she shouted. "Joe! Joe! Joe
come here! Come here now! Mom! Mom!" she cried as she ran to her dad.
"Dad!" she shouted, in his ear, as she wrapped her arms around his neck,
and he squeezed her. He hadn't been able to squeeze her like that for so
long, and it felt so good. "Rachel!" he gasped. She let go a little.
"Daddy! What are you doing here?"

"I don't know." Samuel was crying too now. "But, you remember Isaac." He
nodded to his old, reanimated friend.

Rachel had that confused frown on her face. "Isaac? Yes. What is he—what
are you doing here, mister Abramson?"

Isaac lifted one shoulder and raised his eyebrows. "I don't know. It's a
miracle."

"It's a miracle," Rachel echoed.

"Is your mother … ?" started Samuel.

"Yes!" shouted Rachel. "Mom! Mom!" She grabbed her father's hand, and
dragged him into the house. In the room in the back, sitting on her
bed—oh, they just burst into the room, Rachel shouting, still, "Mom,
mom," and her mother asking, "What?! What Rachel, what are you shouting
for?"—Samuel's widow stared at him. "Samuel?"

"Hi."

That was all he could think of.

She looked, well, older. She was lovely. Lovely as always. But the
intervening few years had, there isn't a tactful way to put this, they
had taken their toll. Sarah was looking sallow, and fragile.

"My love." Samuel let go his daughter's hand, and sat down next to his
wife, to put his arms around her, but she moved sideways, away from him.
"Samuel?"

"It's me, Sarah! It's me. I'm back. I don't how, but I'm back."

"No." Sarah edged further away. "No you're not. This is a trick. This is
wrong. Look at you. How can you look like that? Why aren't you fat?
That's not you. You … aren't my Samuel. My Samuel was fat."

"Sarah?" This was not going the right way.

"Mom," Rachel tried to help. Rebecca was here too now, and Isaac and
Joseph. "Mom, this is Dad. It's a miracle. Look, mister Abramson from
down the road is here too."

"Isaac?" Sarah asked.

"Hello Sarah." Isaac offered.


    Again Jesus cried out in a loud voice. Then he died.

    Then the curtain in the Temple split into two pieces. The tear
    started at the top and tore all the way down to the bottom. Also,
    the earth shook and rocks broke apart. The graves opened, and many
    of God’s people who had died were raised from death. They came out
    of the graves after Jesus was raised from death. They went into the
    holy city, and many people saw them.

    — The Gospel of Matthew 27:50—53


Samuel and Sarah
----------------

For the next few days Sarah gradually became accustomed to having Samuel
back.

He popped into the bakery. Joseph had taken over the business, and
although he didn't do things the same way as Samuel, the business was
going fine. Even well, Samuel had to admit.

Samuel became an instance celebrity. A lot of people came into the
bakery to see him. A lot of people; there were queues outside every
lunchtime down the street. Samuel started baking a couple of items the
way he used to. He didn't want to run the show any more, or take over
from Joseph at all. And he made that clear to Joseph, to avoid any
complications. Joseph seemed to be a bit relieved about that, but also
understood that Samuel was bringing in a lot of customers, and was happy
to have his "signature" bagel, and his apple and cinnamon cake glazed
with vanilla. (Joseph had never been able to get it to taste the same.
Samuel had taken his secret to the grave. But now that he was back from
that very same grave, Joseph paid close attention, and noticed what he
had missed before; Samuel added a lot of honey to the water that he
boiled the apples in.)

Samuel's bagel was just called "Samuel's Signature Bagel" and they
charged just over 50% more than the other bagels. But his cake was
special. It was delicious, of course. But now it was a celebration of
Samuel's return. They called it the "Samuel's Risen Again Cake", and
they just couldn't make enough of them.

Joseph was very happy. But not a fraction as happy as Rachel. Rachel
kept on hugging her dad at every opportunity.

And Sarah warmed to having her husband back. Everyone else was so happy,
and it quickly rubbed off on her. She had felt a little bad about her
initial reaction, but Samuel seemed to let it go, and after a day or two
she swung to the opposite sentiment, like she had to restrain herself a
little. For years now she had been the matriarch of the family, and that
came with a certain decorum. She couldn't just behave the way her
daughter did.

She saved that for when they were alone. Samuel hadn't looked this good
since early in their marriage. His chest was so firm. His stomach so
flat. She felt a little grateful that he still wanted her. She felt at
least ten years older, and here he was, looking twenty years younger.
She felt God was spoiling her, and so, in bed, she spoilt Samuel in
return, and hoped that Yahweh discretely kept his eyes closed.


Samuel and Jesus
----------------

A week or two after Samuel's resurrection, a Hellenised Jewish customer
said to Samuel, "You know a prophet was also resurrected at the same
time as you."

"Really?" asked Samuel. "What kind of prophet?" Hellenised Jews could be
a bit weird sometimes.

"The real kind." The man introduced himself as Matthew, and said, "You
really should meet Him. He is amazing. And what's more, you already have
a miracle in common. If that isn't a sign from God that you must meet, I
don't know what is."

So that Shabbat, instead of going to the Temple with his family as
usual, Samuel met up with Matthew, and they both went to a room above a
shop, where they met more followers of this resurrected prophet.

They all sounded very excited about this prophet. Matthew had
down-played the significance that his followers ascribed to him. They
didn't just think he was a prophet. They considered him to be the
messiah. And, also, the son of God.

Samuel felt extremely uncomfortable about this.

There is only one God, Yahweh. The Torah is very, very clear about that.
And Asherah, the queen of the heavens, is not to be worshipped. She is
not a goddess. She is just an old myth. So how could Yahweh have a son?

Matthew and his friend Cephas explained it. Yahweh's Spirit, the Spirit
with which Yahweh created the world, came down from heaven, and caused a
virgin to fall pregnant, in accordance with the prophet Isaiah. An angel
told her fiancé, Joseph, not to leave her, that she was pregnant with
the son of God, and to name Him Jesus.

"Oh," said Samuel, still a little sceptical. "Is he a Pharisee?"

"Kind of, his father is a carpenter in Nazareth, but he is not like many
Pharisees. Some of his teachings are like those of Rabbi Hillel. He
teaches love, and selflessness. He keeps the mitzvot [#]_, of course,
but He fulfills the Torah."

About 50 people arrived. Some had brought bread, and some others had
brought wine. Everyone at the meeting gathered around a table. They
broke up the bread, poured out the wine, and passed it around. Matthew
explained to Samuel that they do this every time they meet, in memory of
the last time they had supper with Jesus before he was killed.

Suddenly one of the followers shouted, "Jesus!" Everyone turned in the
direction of the shout. One follower had dropped to his knees in front
of a man. The rest of the room realised that the man was busy talking to
a follower. He was saying,

    "You must tell people to change their hearts and lives. If they do
    this, their sins will be forgiven. You must start at Jerusalem and
    preach these things in my name to all nations."

    — The Gospel of Luke 24:47

Nobody interrupted him. He turned, and looked at Matthew, and said,

    “The Son of Man will come again with his Father’s glory and with his
    angels. At that time, he will reward everyone for what he has done.
    I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.”

    — The Gospel of Matthew 16:27—28


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Jewish Law; God's commandments.


Jesus leaves
------------

Jesus left the room, and everyone followed him. He walked almost as far
as Bethany. Then he raised his hands and blessed them all. As he was
blessing them, he was lifted off the ground.

Samuel should have been used to miracles by now, but he gasped. Everyone
did. They stared, open mouthed. Jesus rose up, into the sky, his hands
still raised. He went steadily up and up, and got smaller and smaller.

You and I have seen helium baloons floating up, and have seen the way
they get caught in draughts. Jesus was not moved about. His clothing was
blown a little, but we would probably be reminded of movies involving
tractor beams. Of course, first century Jews had never seen helium
baloons or sci fi movies. But they thought God lived above the
firmament, so it made perfect sense to them.

There was a while where some people said they could still see Jesus, and
tried to point him out to those who couldn't any more. Samuel's eyes
were only a couple of weeks old, and he was one of the last to see Jesus
until he was tinier than a speck, and then nobody could see him any
more.

Then his followers started excitedly shouting to one another, "Did you
see that?! Did you see that?!" They hurried back to Jerusalem, and
Samuel went back to his family and told everyone. From then on they hung
out with Jesus' followers, worshipped in the Temple with them, and met
up often.


Sarah dies
----------

As the years passed, Sarah grew older. That goes without saying, doesn't
it? Everyone grew older. But every now and then someone would realise
that Samuel was looking really good for his age. Really, really good,
for his age. When Sarah was 72 she caught a cold, and it progressed to
pneumonia, and she died. Samuel was 75, kind of. He still looked, and
felt, like a fit 49. He looked younger than Joseph, who was 59 now, and
almost as big as Samuel had been when he had died, and was walking with
a stick. People who didn't know them would never have believed that
Samuel was Joseph's father-in-law.

After Sarah's kevura, a lot of people were talking. And what they were
saying wasn't nice. Oh, they were tremendously nice about Sarah. And
they loved the family. But they were very not happy about Samuel.

A little remark here. A comment there. Samuel asked Joseph that evening
what he thought. Joseph said, "Samuel, I've been meaning to talk to you,
but with Sarah being sick and all, I thought I'd wait."

"Sure," said Samuel. "What did you want to say?"

"It's not good, Samuel. People have been talking to Rachel, and Rachel's
been telling me. They think this is wrong."

"I can't believe that, Joe. I mean, I rose from the dead. I climbed out
of my grave the same day Jesus walked out of his. That's God. There's
nothing else it can be. It's the most powerful miracle of all miracles.
More powerful than a burning bush. More powerful that the parting of a
sea. People don't just come back from the dead after eight years, Joe.
Only God does that."

"I know, Samuel, I know. It's not me saying these things. It's other
people. Not everyone saw Jesus walking about as you did. Not everyone
saw him rising into heaven. They don't know."

"Exactly, Joe, they don't know."

"Yes, but that's the problem, right there. They don't know and they are
afraid. Look at you. You're older than me. You're older than my dad, and
my dad is dead. But at the same time you're younger than me. That scares
people. That totally freaks them out. They get afraid every time they
see you. And when people are really frightened, and they don't know any
better, they do bad things."

"What do you mean, 'bad things'?"

"I think, if nothing changes, they might hurt you. They're not going to
do anything while we sit shiva, and probably nothing during shloshim.
But maybe think of a place to go. Do you have family outside Jerusalem?"

Samuel was quiet. He had a cousin in Hebron. He didn't want to think
about this right now. He had just lost his wife. Go? Move? Run away?

And what about Isaac Abramson? Is he also in danger? And that woman he
helped out of her tomb those years ago? He didn't even know who she was.
What happened to her?

Isaac came to visit Samuel during shiva, which is the first week of
mourning in the Jewish custom. Samuel asked him, "Isaac, are people
talking about how we, uh, don't get older."

"A little. I think not so much about me, though, because I look older
than you. I do feel young, but my hair is white, while yours is still
salt-and-pepper."

"Isaac, Joseph says people have been talking about me. He says they are
afraid of me, and they might hurt me."

"Is that true?" Isaac asked.

"I think it is. They say little comments. I hear their remarks. They say
them like they are jokes, but their smiles are false. I think Joseph
might be right. He said to me yesterday, 'Samuel, have you thought about
what I said?' I said, 'When I'm not thinking about Sarah, it's all I
think about'. He said, 'I've been thinking about it a lot too. I have
just lost a mother, and I will be losing a father too.' He's a good boy,
Joe is. I'm glad Rachel has him."

"Losing? What does he mean 'losing'?" Isaac was concerned.

"I think I must go, Isaac."

"Where?"

"I don't know. I have a cousin in Hebron. Maybe there."

"Do you think it is that serious?"

"Yes, I think it might be. Joseph is afraid people might start to do
stupid things. Bad things."

"That serious?" Isaac asked again.

"Maybe. I trust Joseph. This is not easy. It is not a good time for me.
I am sitting shiva, you know. I have just lost my wife." Samuel paused.
Isaac held his hand. After a while Samuel continued. "I have just lost
my wife. People are thinking, 'Why did Sarah die first? Why is Samuel so
young? It is wrong.'"

"But you did die."

"I know."

"And it isn't wrong. It's a miracle. Can't they see that?"

"No. They can't. Some people remember. My people remember. My people are
happy for me. My people are waiting for Jesus to return. They are
excited. I make them excited, because I am a reminder. I also rose from
the dead, like Jesus. But not everyone sees it like that. Not everyone
believes. For them, I am … " he paused again, "I am a freak. A
deviant. An abomination."

"That's crazy."

Samuel was quiet for a few minutes, while he wondered how to ask, and
then he just said it, "Will you come with me?"

"What?"

"Will you come to Hebron, or wherever we decide to go. We don't have to
go to Hebron. Will you come with me? We are the same. You will have this
problem too one day. Maybe sooner than you think. You will also have to
leave. Come with me. It will be better if we stick together."

Isaac was a little taken aback. "Gee, Samuel. I never thought. Uh. This
is a big thing you are asking. Let me think about it."

"OK," agreed Samuel.

They did not talk about it for the rest of Samuel's shloshim, the month
after the burial. But Samuel bought a travel bag, and he kept some
clothes and things separate.

The day after the end of his shloshim, literally thirty one days after
Sarah had been buried, someone threw a stone at the bakery. It came from
the crowd. Neither Joseph not Samuel knew who threw it. But they both
knew why.

That evening Samuel went to Isaac's house.

"Isaac, I have to go."

"You just got here." Isaac smiled, but he knew what Samuel meant, and he
was trying to make light of it.

"Isaac, they threw a stone at the bakery today."

"Really?"

"Yes. I need to know. Am I going alone, or will you come with me?"

"I haven't decided. I must still say goodbye to my family."

Samuel was dejected. He had really been hoping that Isaac would join
him. Isaac would make this a journey, and not just a sad and lonely
flight.

"Please, Isaac. With you this will be an adventure. Without you nothing
will distract me from my sadness."

Isaac thought. He couldn't say no. How could he say no?

"OK."

Samuel hugged him. Isaac said, "I will probably have to go anyway.
Better to go now, with you, than later, alone."

Samuel went home to pack his travel bag, and say his goodbyes while
Isaac spoke to his family, and said his goodbyes too. Isaac had been
living with one of his grandchildren, and to be honest they didn't seem
as sad as Samuel's family about his departure. Maybe it was the right
time after all.


Travel
------

Samuel and Isaac travelled south to Hebron. They stayed with Samuel's
cousin, David, for about three months. David was much younger than
Samuel, but by now looked older. He didn't recognise Samuel, but saw the
likeness after some conversation about the family in Jerusalem.

"To what do we owe the pleasure of your visit?" asked David.

This was a pretty predictable question, and one for which Samuel and
Isaac had prepared. "Well, Isaac and I are old friends, and although we
look healthy, we wanted to travel a bit. We don't want to stay long. We
haven't decided where to go next; perhaps east. But we wanted a little
adventure while we still can."

That seemed to satisfy David.

Samuel baked for the family, for which they were appreciative. Isaac
mended a few shoes. Then Samuel offered his services with a baker in the
neighbourhood, and although the pay was lousy, he gave half to David,
and David said, "Stay as long as you want!"

They stayed for ten years. David's wife, Mariam, asked, "Samuel, what do
you do to look so healthy?"

"I come from good stock!" Samuel joked, grinning at David. But he knew,
then, it was time to move on.

They moved to Perea, east of the Dead Sea, where they settled for twenty
years, and then headed north. Each time they settled it was for no more
than about twenty years. They survived the Jewish–Roman wars, including
the Bar Kokhba revolt, and the mass killing of Jews that followed it.

They witnessed the rise of Christianity. Samuel and Isaac would speak of
Jesus, and of Matthew and Cephas, but only in private. Cephas, or Peter
as he had become known in Rome, had died long ago. In public, they
worshipped with the churches in whichever city they lived, but Samuel
never mentioned that he had met Jesus, had witnessed his ascension into
heaven, had known Peter, and that it was Matthew, his customer at the
bakery, who had brought him to his first communion, all that time ago;
what, for everyone else, was lifetimes ago.

He did not live in any place long enough to live a lifetime with anyone.
Anyone but Isaac, but that wasn't the same. He missed it. Sarah was the
last person he loved for a lifetime. And death became an interest for
Samuel.

They moved north of Israel, through Phoenicia, all the way up to
Constantinople. There he befriended a couple of old people, John and
Marcia. For decades everything had felt transitory. He and Isaac would
settle down. Isaac would work for a cobbler. Samuel would work for a
baker. They would make friends at church. But they never told anyone
anything that would surprise or frighten them. And they always knew that
one day they would say their goodbyes, and leave.

He had trusted people before. He had married a widow in Antioch named
Julia. One night, after she had accused him of lying to her, or, at
least, hiding the truth from her, he had told her everything. Absolutely
everything. She had cried. He didn't understand why. Maybe she thought
that he was still hiding the truth, but instead of saying nothing, now
he was covering it up with a really big lie. Maybe she thought he was
crazy. Maybe she believed him, and realised that she could never be a
part of his life the way she had wanted to be. Maybe she was just sad,
and confused, and even lonelier than she had been before.

She had cried herself to sleep. And the next morning she had quietly
asked Samuel to leave. And Samuel had quietly left. At first he didn't
leave the city, he just moved out of the house, but then someone asked
him if it was true, that he really had met Jesus. Samuel denied it. The
same day he went to Isaac and told him it was time they moved on.

Samuel wanted to feel a kind of permanence that ends naturally. He
thought that would be more genuine. When he met John and Marcia in
Constantinople they were already frail. He and Isaac stayed with them,
and cooked and cleaned for them in exchange for accommodation. They were
Greek, and Samuel and Isaac introduced them to traditional Jewish
cooking, and observed Jewish holidays and festivals with them. They
really enjoyed that. And living in a big city, and running the kitchen
themselves, allowed Samuel and Isaac to keep a kosher kitchen easily.
They found that deeply gratifying, and peaceful. John and Marcia were
Christians, but very Hellenistic in their religion. But the rigour of
Jewish ritual gave them a sense of order, even purpose perhaps, that
seemed to rejuvenate them.

"Why do you keep the mitzvot, if you are Christian?" asked Marcia, after
she had lit the Shabbat candles one Friday evening.

Samuel replied, “Jesus said,

    ‘Don’t think that I have come to destroy the law of Moses or the
    teaching of the prophets. I have not come to destroy their teachings
    but to do what they said. I tell you the truth. Nothing will
    disappear from the law until heaven and earth are gone. The law will
    not lose even the smallest letter or the smallest part of a letter
    until all has happened.’”

    — The Gospel of Matthew 5:17—18

"Then shouldn't all Christians keep the mitzvot?" asked John.

"They should keep the mitzvot if they want to. Keeping the mitzvot
brings me peace. But it is not the mitzvot that saves us; it is faith
in Jesus."

That seemed like a satisfying answer. John pondered it, and then asked,
"What do you mean?"

"About what?"

"Faith in Jesus. Do you mean trust that Jesus will save us?"

"Yes," said Samuel, "I have faith that Jesus will save us. Literally. He
will return at the end of the world. Before I am dead, he will come with
his kingdom. He said so. And I trust him."

Samuel got a sinking feeling in his stomach. He had said too much. He
wondered whether John or Marcia would pick it up. He smiled his
I-trust-him smile, and hoped it would cover up his before-I-am-dead
slip.

"What?" said John. "Before you are dead?"

Crap. The smile hadn't worked. Samuel looked at Isaac. Isaac looked
back, his eyes wide, with a look of resignation on his face. He gave a
tiny shrug.

"Jesus said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'"

    — The Gospel of Matthew 16:28

Samuel went one, "I was standing there."

"You saw Jesus?!"

"Yes."

John stared at Samuel.

Marcia asked Isaac, "Did you see Jesus?"

"No. Matthew was a customer of Samuel. Samuel had a bakery. In
Jerusalem. Matthew took Samuel to a communion supper. Jesus appeared. It
was the last time that Jesus appeared before he ascended into heaven. I
wasn't there."

"Of course you weren't there. How old are you, Isaac?"

"I don't know. But I believe Samuel. We have known each other for a very
long time?"

"How long?"

"A very, very long time. We … we remember the Temple."

"Which temple?"

"The Temple. The Temple in Jerusalem. It was destroyed in the Great
Jewish Revolt." Isaac was trying to remember exactly when, but it was a
long time ago. It had been a bad time.

John and Marcia were watching them, trying to decide whether they were
crazy, or lying, or telling the truth.

Then, with a little laugh, John said, "Well, guys, you certainly seem to
know what you're talking about, then. If you trust Jesus, then we trust
Jesus, because we trust you."

And that was that.

Samuel's and Isaac's longevity was never spoken about again.

"Did they believe us?" Samuel asked Isaac a couple of days later.

"I don't know," said Isaac. "Let's not ask them."

"Agreed."

But the fact that Samuel and Isaac had actually told them and they
hadn't had to move because of it, make Samuel feel a sense of closeness
and commitment to John and Marcia that he had not felt since Jerusalem.
John and Marcia felt, to him, like family.

When Marcia became ill, Samuel helped alongside her slave, for tasks
that did not require the kind of discretion that would prevent the
assistance of a man.

John and Marica had never had children, and Marcia meant everything to
John. Despite his friendship with Samuel and Isaac, after Marcia's death
John pined to be with her gain. He died one cold winter night two years
later.

Samuel felt exactly the way he had wanted to feel; physical
grief. The kind of grief he had felt when Sarah had died. It felt like
an illness, when you are weak. And numb. He and Isaac grieved together.

"When is he coming back, do you think, Isaac?"

Isaac knew Samuel meant Jesus.

"I don't know."

"Will it be long, do you think?"

"I thought it would be soon. But it hasn't been soon."

"Do you think we will die?" wondered Samuel.

"Probably not."

"Then let's go south."

John had left Samuel and Isaac his entire estate. They gave it all to
the church of Constantinople, and headed south, towards Arabia, and the
Muslims.


Islam
-----

Samuel and Isaac were pleasantly surprised by Islam. Muslims had a
certain respect for Christianity, and especially Jewish Christianity,
that contradicted the stories they had heard in the Empire. Muslims
followed many of the southern Christian customs, like women's head
coverings, and facing Jerusalem when they prayed, although they faced
Mecca instead.

Samuel and Isaac moved south to Arabia, and then gradually west, across
north Africa, and then over to Jabal ṬTāriq and Al-Andalus, what is
today the south of Spain.

Samuel and Isaac lived all over Al-Andalus over the centuries. Many
times Isaac worked as a cartographer. Samuel and Isaac both learned to
read, for the first time in their lives, not Aramaic, which they still
spoke to each other in private, not Hebrew nor Greek, but Arabic, which
was now the language they spoke every day.

Neither Samuel nor Isaac had been intellectually inclined, but in the
caliphates of al-Andalus there was a spirit of study and reason that
followed from the work of Ibn Sina [#]_ and Ibn Rushd [#]_
after those philosophers' ideas had been deprecated in the east.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] known as Avicenna in the West
.. [#] known as Averroes in the West


Spain
-----

When the south of Spain was conquered by Castile, Christians and Jews
were welcomed into the kingdom, on condition they followed the
traditions of the church of Rome. About 1500 years had passed since
Samuel had met Jesus, and this was the first time he and Isaac had
encountered the church of Rome. It wasn't fundamentally different from
Christianity under the caliphate, except for the fact that being
Christian meant being not Jewish; not Jewish at all.

Samuel and Isaac hadn't experienced anything like this since the
Roman-Jewish Wars, over a thousand years earlier. Islam had respected
their practices, and although there was always a limit to their
professional progress because they weren't Muslim, they were subject to
a similar limit as a result their immortality; they would always need to
move and take on new identities, eventually, and that made it difficult
to accummulate wealth. Also, wealth attracted attention, and attention
was exactly what they needed to avoid.

They kept their heads down. They lived together in a moderate house.
They worshipped in the Seville Cathedral. They had Christian friends.
They ate meals with them, and one of their friends, Juan Marco, was
Samuel's boss in a bakery in Seville. So when Jews were forced to
convert, or be killed, nobody accused or even suspected Samuel and Isaac
of being Jewish.

But they moved to Cordoba, and one night in 1482 the Inquisition raided
their house before dawn, and found prayer shawls. They seized Samuel and
Isaac, and interrogated them. Samuel and Isaac both insisted they were
Christian. It was clear to the inquisitors that they had a deep
understanding of Christianity. But when their Cordoban friends were
asked about them, they said they hadn't known them for long.

It was also very suspicious that two men of their age lived alone
together. They were accused of sodomy, and tortured for a confession.
Their fingernails were ripped out. At one point Isaac said he may have
had a whistful feeling towards Samuel, but that was many years ago, on a
particularly lonely and drunken evening, and nothing had ever happened,
because they were just old friends. But his anecdote didn't make things
better. Instead Isaac was found guilty of sodomy.

At one point, while Samuel's feet were being burned, he exclaimed that
he was more of a Christian than they could ever be. On further enquiry,
Samuel confessed to meeting Jesus, and Peter, and having known Matthew.
Well, that did it. Samuel was found guilty of Satanic possession.

They were imprisonned for a month. Then they were paraded through the
city clothed in yellow sackcloth with their heads covered, and then led
outside to the quemadero, the burning place. They were chained to a
wooden pole, back-to-back, on top of a tarred pyre, and then the pyre
was set alight. Their feet burned. Their lungs filled with black smoke.
And each could feel the other writhing in pain as the chains would
tighten and loosen. Eventually they lost consciousness, and then fell
into a coma.

They were left outside for a day and then they were thrown into a pit.

They remained unconscious for a week. During that time their fingers and
toes grew back. And their ears, and their eyelids. Their lungs healed.
They successfully fought off massive infection as skin once again
covered their flesh. It took Samuel three days to force himself, pushing
and scratching, up to the surface, where he could finally breathe
properly. Then he dug back down all night, shouting to Isaac, who
shouted back, until he had dug his friend out too. They were naked. They
had no hair on their heads, no eyebrows or eyelashes, and a few days'
worth of stubble on their jaws. Their new fingernails were shredded from
the digging and their fingers were bleeding again. They made their way
to the Guadalquivir River, and lay in it, allowing themselves to drift
out of the city.

When they climbed out the river, they begged for clothes, and food, and
headed northeast. Northeast out of Spain, through France, to the Holy
Roman Empire.


Berlin
------

They spent about twenty years in Berlin, then the capital of the
principality of Brandenburg. They found a community of Sephardic [#]_
Jews. And they found a Christian attitude that was a lot less
sympathetic to Rome than the name "Holy Roman Empire" would suggest.
Unlike with southern and western European kingdoms, since Charlemagne,
or Karl der Große as he was known locally, the papacy and the central
European ruling class seemed to have established a working relationship
with more clearly-defined boundaries; popes look after souls, and kings
look after governance.

It was here that Samuel first heard of the legend of Der Ewige Jude, the
Eternal Jew. Once again, Samuel was working as a baker. A farmer was
delivering flour one day, and mentioned a remarkable thing that had
happened. He said that his plough had moved on Sunday. It had fallen
over, and the ground near it flattened slightly, to form a resting
place. Obviously, said the farmer, it was the Eternal Jew.

Samuel did not want to ask the farmer directly, and so he asked a friend
of his, Werner, over beer that evening. He told Werner what the farmer
told him, and Werner confirmed the story, and explained, "Yes, his name
is Cartaphilus. He is a shoemaker. He struck Jesus when Jesus rested
while carrying his cross, and told him to go faster. Jesus replied to
him, 'I shall rest now, but you shall not rest until the last day.'"

Samuel said, "No. That's not it."

"What do you mean?" asked Werner, "What's not it?"

"He did not strike Jesus. He is waiting for Jesus. Jesus said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'

"He is waiting for Jesus. He has lived longer than Methuselah. He has
seen more than any man should ever see. He loves Jesus, and he yearns
for Jesus' return. He yearns for it like a man lost in the desert yearns
for water."

Werner looked at him for a moment. "How do you know that?"

"Because the Bible says so. It is in the Gospel of Matthew. He is a
follower of Jesus. He would never have struck him."

"Oh." Werner thought for a moment. "Then who moved the farmer's plough?"

"I don't know. Maybe it just fell, and a dog lay in its shade. It could
have been anything."

That night Samuel could not sleep. He kept going over the story in his
mind.

Why did Jesus say that?

Why, when lots of people were brought back from the dead that Passover
centuries ago, why did only Jesus get lifted up into heaven?

Was Samuel being punished? How could that be? Samuel was a better
Christian than any Christian he knew. He kept the mitzvot. In the early
days, especially in Jerusalem, all Christians kept the mitzvot. Now none
of them do. He trusted Jesus. He followed Jesus longer than anyone.
Isaac came a close second, but Isaac had come to Christianity after
Samuel. Even Job, when God was testing him, even Job, one day, got to
die. Samuel did not get to die. Samuel had been burned until he was like
a sacrificial offering.

    The priest must burn all the animal’s parts on the altar. It is a
    whole burnt offering, an offering made by fire. And its smell is
    pleasing to the Lord.

    — Leviticus 1:9

Was the smell of Samuel's burnt offering displeasing to the Lord? He had
not struck Jesus. He didn't even get to speak to Jesus. Why was he
chosen? Why not Matthew? Or Cephas?

Maybe it was because he had not spent his life preaching to all nations,
as Jesus had instructed. He had preached a little. You know, a
conversation here, and an encouragement there. But he had always lived a
quiet life, not like Cephas, not like Paul. He was friendly, even jovial,
but inside he had always been timid. Was that why God was punishing him?

Is Jesus waiting for him before he returns? Is the fact that Jesus has
not yet returned somehow because of him? That can't be.

He must speak to someone about this. He must speak to a priest. He will
go to confession. But not in Berlin. He will be recognised. He will go
to Hamburg.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Jews from Al-Andalus


Hamburg
-------

"Bless me Father, for I have sinned. It has been a week since my last
confession," Samuel began.

And then he paused.

"Please continue, my son," prompted the priest.

"Well, Father, I am not sure exactly what my sin is, but I know that I
am being punished by God. Maybe tested. I don't know."

"Why do believe this?"

"I have seen Jesus."

Samuel paused. He had thought about this conversation all the way from
Berlin, but he still was unsure how to start, or how to proceed.

"Indeed. We see Jesus, and the effects of the Holy Spirit in creation,
in our lives, and in the lives of others."

"Uh, I mean, about fifteen hundred years ago, I saw Jesus. We were
upstairs, in a room above a shop. Matthew had brought me there. Jesus
appeared. We were all in a state of awe. Jesus was talking to Luke. And
then he turned to Matthew and said,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'

"And I know that he was talking about me. I knew at that moment, because
I already knew I was special. And I have known all this time. I knew
when my wife died, and I had not grown older. I knew when the Great
Jewish Revolt was suppressed, and I was spared. I knew when I was
mistaken for a marrano [#]_ in Spain, and burned at the stake, but did
not die."

"Are you telling me the truth, my son?"

"Yes, Father, all of this is true."

"Are you a cobbler?"

"No, Father, but my friend is a cobbler, and he cannot die either."

"Did you live in Armenia?"

"I have lived in Armenia. I have lived in many different places."

"I have heard of you! You are the Eternal Jew."

"No, Father, I mean yes, but the story you heard is not me. I heard that
story too. I heard of the Jew who struck Jesus on his way to be
crucified. I did not do that. I only met Jesus after he rose from the
dead. We both rose from the dead the Sunday after Passover. I am one of
the people spoken of by Matthew in chapter 27 of his gospel."

"This is amazing! My son, I know this is unconventional, but do you mind
if we leave the confessional, and take a walk through the grounds. I
want to see who you are."

"Uh, uh," Samuel was a little afraid. Things had not worked out well
when he had been honest with people to this degree. He liked the
security and sworn secrecy of the confessional.

"We will be alone, and I will not speak of this. I just want to meet
you."

"Uh, OK," agreed Samuel, hesitantly.

They stepped out of the confessional, and the priest looked at him
intensely. "Your eyes are old. I can see that. They look young, but
behind your eyes, I can see you are old.

"I have so many questions," the priest continued.

"I'm not sure I have answers for you," admitted Samuel, "I came to you
because I have questions too."

"Well then, my son, let us start with your questions."

"What does my life mean? Why did Jesus say that, and then just leave me
to live, instead of returning within a normal lifetime."

"I cannot answer that. They ways of the Lord are higher than our minds."

"My life is not unpleasant. The Eternal Jew of the legend is unable to
rest. That is not the case with me. I have a comfortable life; as
comfortable as any other. And, of course, I am not a Jew. I met the
Christ, and I have followed him ever since. I am a Christian. Jesus kept
the Jewish law. I keep the Jewish law. But one thing that is almost
unbearable for me is that God will not allow me to die.

"Many people are afraid of death. But for me, death would mean … I don't
know what it would mean. Jesus will return before I die. I will never
die. At least, not again. I died eight years before Jesus was killed.
And I rose from my tomb on the same day he did."

"Is that a question?" asked the priest.

"Uh, no."

"May I ask a question?"

"Of course. I will do my best to answer it."

"What is Jesus like?"

"Well, have you read the Old Testament?"

"Of course I have."

"Jesus is like reading the Old Testament, forgiving everything that is
evil or wrong, and living everything that is good. Jesus is the most
compassionate interpretation of the entire Torah. Meeting Jesus is like
seeing God speaking, but in the voice of your dad."

"Really?"

"Yes."

"What did Jesus say to you?"

"He blessed us. And then he ascended into heaven."

"Yes, but what did he say to you, personally."

"He never said anything to me, individually. He spoke to some of the
apostles individually, but to the rest of us he just addressed us
collectively."

"So you didn't really meet him, you just saw him close up."

"Well, sure, I guess you could put it like that."

"So how do you know that Jesus is like the Word of God in the voice of
your dad?"

"Well, I saw him, right? So I should know. Also, the Bible says so, the
Word of God. Right?"

"Yes, look, don't get me wrong. I believe you. I absolutely believe you.
I just want to understand how come. I am a priest. Every time I say
something, people take my word for it. In this city, I am God's
representative, and they believe it because I say it. And I know my
Bible. The Bible is also God's representative, and they believe it
because it says it. But that's why I want to know more. Excuse the pushy
questions. I am hungry for more. You lie in bed at night and think about
what your life means. I also lie in bed at night, and think about what
the Bible means, and what the things I say mean. Why? Why are they true?
Are they true just because it is written? Who wrote it? If I changed the
Bible, and told everyone my version was the real one, they would believe
me. They would, you know. I know they would. Has that ever happened
before?"

"No."

"No?"

"No. You cannot think these thoughts."

"Look, please, the things you have spoken to me about, I cannot tell a
soul, on pain of death. It is an oath I have sworn, as a priest. I am
asking you to offer me the same assurance. The things I have said to
you, they are not acceptable thoughts. We both know that."

"I survived the Inquisition. I know how some thoughts are unacceptable.
Actually, I feel safer that we can keep each other's questions to
ourselves. This has turned out to be more than my confession. This is a
communion of confessions."

"I like that," said the priest, "a communion of confessions. I don't
know whether we have answered any questions, but I am deeply grateful
that I was able to ask."

"I am too, Father. You have given me a lot to think about."

"And you me."


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] A Jew forced to convert to Christianity in Spain


England
-------

Samuel had to wait a very long time before he could ask the questions
that arose from his conversation with the priest in Hamburg.

He was sitting in a pub on Fleet Street, in London, in 1992. He struck
up a conversation with an author. As it happened, Samuel had recently
read one of his novels, a story involving a time-traveling detective.
Samuel had enjoyed it more than he usually enjoyed books, especially
since Samuel had once actually heard Johann Sebastian Bach perform.

"As it happens, Mr Adams, I know Bach in a way that most people don't,
and I have a particular fondness for his work."

Douglas Adams grinned, "It's Douglas, Samuel. I'm glad you enjoyed my
book."

"Thank you, Douglas. Actually, there is something that has been on my
mind for a while now, and I think it needs a holistic approach to find a
solution. An approach that might play to your strengths."

"Well," started Douglas, a little doubtfully.

"Barman, another two pints, please," interrupted Samuel.

"Well, I don't mind if I do. Thank you Samuel. I will do my best to
answer your question."

Samuel began, "I know Jesus."

"Wait! I'm going to have to stop you right there, Samuel. This is not a
conversation I want to have."

"No, Douglas, I promise this is not the conversation you think it is.
Please give me 60 more seconds."

"OK, but only because you just ordered me another beer."

"OK. Let's deal in the hypothetical then. Imagine a client employs Dirk
Gently [#]_ on a case. The client has met Jesus, in person. And
because of something Jesus said, that client cannot die. The client will
remain alive until Jesus comes with his kingdom."

"OK. You've managed to save yourself there, Samuel, you can keep going."

"My question for Mr Gently is, what is the meaning of his client's
life?"

"The universe, and everything? I thought I stated that answer pretty
clearly [#]_."

Samuel laughed. "No, not the universe and everything. Not yet. Let's
just start with the life of the client."

"OK. Well, Samuel, Averroes, a Muslim philosopher who was also an
Aristotlean—"

"I remember the work of Averroes."

"Ah, good. Then you may recall Averroes believed that there were two
paths to truth; reason and revelation, and that one can use either of
those paths and they both lead to the same truth."

"Yes."

"And later Aquinas proposed that moral truth can only be known through
revelation, because attempts to reason it will only result in flawed
approximations of God's objective morality. But Aquinas also worked hard
to show that one can reason one's way to truth, even the truth of God's
existence."

"Yes. He didn't manage, though, but he did give it the old college try,"
concurred Samuel in the vernacular.

"Yes he did, didn't he? Well, where are we now? Dirk's client's question
is one about experience. And experience includes revelation. And it's
also one about reason. His client can rationalise the meaning of his
extraordinary life, but the reason he does not know it already is
because he has been relying on revelation to reveal it for him. He has
been waiting. Waiting a very, very long time. An unreasonably long
time.

"I think we need to come to terms with the fact that experience is what
happens in our heads. How it gets there is in part a result of what
happens to us, and in part how we understand what happens to us.

"Did Jesus say,

    'I tell you the truth. There are some people standing here who,
    before they die, will see the Son of Man coming with his kingdom.'

because he intended to keep those people alive for 2000 years, at least,
or because he knew they would live for 2000 years, at least?

"Maybe God is not punishing you, Samuel. Maybe shit just happens, and
something fucking weird happened that Passover weekend, and your body
heals itself faster than you can die. Here's a question for you: If you
destroy your brain—squish it flat; blow it off completely—and your
body grows a new brain, will you still be you? Or will you be someone
else?

"If you are still you, I'd love to know where your body keeps a backup
of all your memories, if not in your head.

"I digress, though. And this next part is important:

"The reason we have aeroplanes and CD players and Apple Macs today, and
we didn't when you were born, is because Averroes was wrong. And Aquinas
was wrong too. Reason is not as good as revelation. Reason is much, much
better than revelation. Revelation is certainly a thing. But everyone
has different revelations. Conservation of energy works the same for
everyone. Gravity works the same for everyone. But the kingdom of God is
slightly different for everyone. And the parts of the kingdon of God
that seem to be the same for everyone don't reveal what is true about
the kingdom of God; they reveal what is true about people.

"Revelation does not tell you about an external reality. Revelation only
ever tells you about yourself. You think you are looking at something
else, but actually, you have always been looking at a mirror."

Samuel stopped him. "But Douglas, I know what I saw. Jesus was a real
guy, and he really did ascend into heaven."

"Heaven? You think heaven is in the sky?"

"Well, I did at the time. I don't anymore."

"Do you think he rose up into the sky *because* you thought heaven is in
the sky?"

"Maybe," thought Samuel. "I mean, when you put it like that, where would
he be now? In the vaccuum of space? Did he float up until he could just
enter into the heaven dimension, or the spirit realm? Why didn't he do
that on the ground? Maybe the rising into the sky was for show. I mean
when he arrived in the room that day, he just seemed to be there, as if
he had been there all the time but nobody had noticed him."

Douglas continued, "Let's not get caught up in specifics yet. I'll leave
you to ponder that later. I want to wrap up how we know what we know. We
know what is true not through revelation, but through evidence. Science
is a method, and that method has four simple steps: Observe something;
Come up with an idea to explain your observation; Find evidence to
support or disprove your idea; Share your findings. That's it. That's
all there is to it. People talk about science like it's an esoteric
religion. It's not. It's just stuff we've learned by applying that
method. And if you disagree with the findings, you can check the
evidence. People do all the time. People become famous by disproving old
ideas.

"So where does all this leave us? The only truth that revelation reveals
is truth about yourself. Evidence is what determines what is really
true. God is not blessing you, rewarding you or punishing you. You are
who you are. You get to choose how you want to work with who you are.

"I can't make that choice for you. But I'd like to make some
suggestions. Immortality offers you the opportunity to get really,
really good at stuff. You say you bake really well. That's great. I
think you should try to be a teacher next. That is an invaluable skill.
And you have a lot you can teach."


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Douglas Adams wrote two novels about a detective named Dirk
       Gently, "Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency" (1987) and "The
       Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul" (1988)

.. [#] In his novel "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" (1979),
       Douglas Adams features a computer that calculates that the answer
       to "life, the universe and everything" is 42.


Jesus
-----

Samuel thought about what Douglas had said. He thought about the
questions that the German priest had asked. Today, this is how Samuel
explains it to his students.

    Jesus is not just a way of reading Scripture. He is also a
    reflection of ourselves.

    Seeing the Son of Man coming with his kingdom is not an event. His
    kingdom is not a place. His kingdom is a way of living. Jesus is a
    way of interpreting the Torah; the most compassionate way. And so
    seeing the Son of Man coming with his kingdom means living, every
    day and all the time, the most compassionate interpretation of the
    Torah.

    This can be done, indeed must be done, for all Scripture, and even
    non-religious texts. The first ten amendments of the United States
    Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights both
    demand compassionate interpretation, and the reasons they were
    written should be carved into the hearts of all of us.

    This is not Christianity, or Judaism, or Islam. It is not religion.
    It is just compassion. Compassion that becomes the thread from which
    the fabric of your life is woven. Compassion that you live in, and
    that lives through you.

    This is what it means to live in the kingdom of God. And just like
    the way Jesus appeared to his disciples after his death, it turned
    out that he was there all along, and we just hadn't noticed him, but
    when we did it changed everything. So the kingdom of God has always
    been here. It took me so long to notice it. But now that I have, it
    changes everything.


Appendix
--------

Miracle
^^^^^^^

*Was there a real man named Jesus?* If you know Samuel very well, and he
trusts you deeply, he will tell you that he thinks that much was real.

*Did he rise up into the sky?* Samuel gets a little uncertain at this
point. Something happened. What it was isn't exactly clear.

*How come Samuel is so old?* He doesn't know. But he is the subject of a
study at his university, and he is going for tests, and maybe someone
will come up with a plausible hypothesis. And maybe whatever we learn
can be used to help people, cure disease and alleviate suffering.

*Where is Isaac?* He is currently living a quiet life in an undisclosed
village somewhere in the English midlands.

*What happened to the woman who Samuel and Isaac helped out of her tomb
all that time ago?* Samuel has thought about her more times than he will
probably admit. He doesn't know. When the results of his study are
published, perhaps she will look him up.

*Oh, come on! The guy was dead for about eight years! His brain had
completely decayed! It was quite obviously a miracle. A 100%
supernatural God-proving miracle. Admit it.* OK. OK. Let's be completely
open and honest about all this, then. I wasn't going to explain it, but
you've got me in a corner here. This is a story that combines a few
slightly impossible things, and then extrapolates a plot. It mixes in
some people who really did exist, like Douglas Adams, with some people
who didn't, like Samuel. I did that because I want to show you
something; I'm using characters and narrative to carry a message, and
featuring a few real people, places and events adds credibility and
makes it easier to remember. I'm kind of spoiling the fun a little, but
I'm trying to show how Samuel learns how we know things, and what that
means for his life. Maybe it means something for your life too.

Can you think of another book that uses the same narrative devices? What
if some of the things you thought were literal, aren't? Would the
messages in that other book be any different?


Seriously? More Questions?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*You took Matthew 16 out of chronological order.* Did I? Gosh, look at
that. [#]_

*What translation did you use?* The International Children's Bible.


Dramatis Personae
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Samuel bar Jacob
    The protagonist of our story. A baker from Jerusalem.

Isaac Abramson
    An old friend of Samuel

Rebecca
    Friend of Rachel

Rachel
    Daughter of Samuel

Joseph
    Husband of Rachel

Sarah
    Wife of Samuel

Jesus
    The Son of Man. The Word of God.

Matthew
    A follower of Jesus, later to write the Gospel of Matthew, where
    Samuel is obliquely referenced in chapter 16.

Cephas
    A follower of Jesus, later to establish the churches of Antioch and
    Rome. "Cephas" means "stone" in Aramaic. "Peter" means "stone" in
    Greek. He will later be known as Saint Peter.

David
    Cousin of Samuel

Mariam
    Wife of David

John and Marcia
    Friends of Samuel and Isaac

Julia
    Second wife of Samuel

Juan Marco
    A baker

Douglas Adams
    Douglas Adams


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] You know the Gospel of John does the same with the story of Jesus
       driving the money changers out of the Temple. John has it
       happening at the start of his ministry. Mark, Matthew and Luke
       have it happening at the end. Some scholars say that Jesus must
       have done it twice, but that seems like a bit of a stretch. Why
       would Mark, Matthew and Luke all forget to mention the first
       time, and John not bother to mention the second time? So if it's
       OK for the author of the Gospel of John to play with chronology,
       it should be OK for my little story.
